
--- PAGE 118 (book page ~116) ---
118    Chapter  4 ■  Requirements  engineering
Ethnography is helpful to understand existing systems, but this understanding 
does not always help with innovation. Innovation is particularly relevant for new 
product development. Commentators have suggested that Nokia used ethnography to discover how people used their phones and developed new phone models on that basis; Apple, on the other hand, ignored current use and revolutionized the mobile phone industry with the introduction of the iPhone.
Ethnographic studies can reveal critical process details that are often missed by 
other requirements elicitation techniques. However, because of its focus on the end-user, this approach is not effective for discovering broader organizational or domain requirements or for suggestion innovations. You therefore have to use ethnography as one of a number of techniques for requirements elicitation.
	 4.3.2 		 Stories 	and	scenarios
People find it easier to relate to real-life examples than abstract descriptions. They are not good at telling you the system requirements. However, they may be able to describe how they handle particular situations or imagine things that they might do in a new way of working. Stories and scenarios are ways of capturing this kind of information. You can then use these when interviewing groups of stakeholders to discuss the system with other stakeholders and to develop more specific system requirements.
Stories and scenarios are essentially the same thing. They are a description of how 
the system can be used for some particular task. They describe what people do, what information they use and produce, and what systems they may use in this process. The difference is in the ways that descriptions are structured and in the level of detail presented. Stories are written as narrative text and present a high-level description of system use; scenarios are usually structured with specific information collected such as inputs and outputs. I find stories to be effective in setting out the “big picture.” Parts of stories can then be developed in more detail and represented as scenarios.
Figure 4.9 is an example of a story that I developed to understand the requirements 
for the iLearn digital learning environment that I introduced in Chapter 1. This story describes a situation in a primary (elementary) school where the teacher is using the environment to support student projects on the fishing industry. You can see this is a very high-level description. Its purpose is to facilitate discussion of how the iLearn system might be used and to act as a starting point for eliciting the requirements for that system.Ethno graphic
analysisDebriefing
meetingsFocused
ethno graphy
Prototype
evaluation
Generic system
developmentSystem
protoypingFigure 4.8  Ethnography 
and prototyping for requirements analysis

--- PAGE 119 (book page ~117) ---
  4.3 ■  Requirements  elicitation    119
The advantage of stories is that everyone can easily relate to them. We found this 
approach to be particularly useful to get information from a wider community than 
we could realistically interview. We made the stories available on a wiki and invited teachers and students from across the country to comment on them.
These high-level stories do not go into detail about a system, but they can be 
developed into more specific scenarios. Scenarios are descriptions of example user interaction sessions. I think that it is best to present scenarios in a structured way rather than as narrative text. User stories used in agile methods such as Extreme Programming, are actually narrative scenarios rather than general stories to help elicit requirements.
A scenario starts with an outline of the interaction. During the elicitation process, 
details are added to create a complete description of that interaction. At its most general, a scenario may include:
1.
 A description of what the system and users expect when the scenario starts.
2. A description of the normal flow of events in the scenario.
3. A description of what can go wrong and how resulting problems can be handled.
4. Information about other activities that might be going on at the same time.
5. A description of the system state when the scenario ends.
As an example of a scenario, Figure 4.10 describes what happens when a student 
uploads photos to the KidsTakePics system, as explained in Figure 4.9. The key dif-
ference between this system and other systems is that a teacher moderates the uploaded photos to check that they are suitable for sharing.
You can see this is a much more detailed description than the story in Figure 4.9, 
and so it can be used to propose requirements for the iLearn system. Like stories, scenarios can be used to facilitate discussions with stakeholders who sometimes may have different ways of achieving the same result.Figure 4.9  A user story 
for the iLearn systemPhoto sharing in the classroom
Jack is a primary school teacher in Ullapool (a village in northern Scotland). He has decided that a class project 
should be focused on the fishing industry in the area, looking at the history, development, and economic impact of fishing. As part of this project, pupils are asked to gather and share reminiscences from relatives, use newspa-per archives, and collect old photographs related to fishing and fishing communities in the area. Pupils use an iLearn wiki to gather together fishing stories and SCRAN (a history resources site) to access newspaper archives and photographs. However, Jack also needs a photo-sharing site because he wants pupils to take and comment on each other’s photos and to upload scans of old photographs that they may have in their families.
Jack sends an email to a primary school teachers’ group, which he is a member of, to see if anyone can rec-
ommend an appropriate system. Two teachers reply, and both suggest that he use KidsTakePics, a photo-sharing site that allows teachers to check and moderate content. As KidsTakePics is not integrated with the iLearn authentication service, he sets up a teacher and a class account. He uses the iLearn setup service to add KidsTakePics to the services seen by the pupils in his class so that when they log in, they can immediately use the system to upload photos from their mobile devices and class computers.

--- PAGE 120 (book page ~118) ---
120    Chapter  4 ■  Requirements  engineering
	 4.4		Requirements 	specification
Requirements specification is the process of writing down the user and system require -
ments in a requirements document. Ideally, the user and system requirements should 
be clear, unambiguous, easy to understand, complete, and consistent. In practice, this is almost impossible to achieve. Stakeholders interpret the requirements in different ways, and there are often inherent conflicts and inconsistencies in the requirements.
User requirements are almost always written in natural language supplemented 
by appropriate diagrams and tables in the requirements document. System require-ments may also be written in natural language, but other notations based on forms, graphical, or mathematical system models can also be used. Figure 4.11 summarizes possible notations for writing system requirements.
The user requirements for a system should describe the functional and nonfunctional 
requirements so that they are understandable by system users who don’t have detailed technical knowledge. Ideally, they should specify only the external behavior of the sys-tem. The requirements document should not include details of the system architecture or design. Consequently, if you are writing user requirements, you should not use soft-ware jargon, structured notations, or formal notations. You should write user require-ments in natural language, with simple tables, forms, and intuitive diagrams.Figure 4.10  Scenario 
for uploading photos in KidsTakePicsuploading photos to Kids takePics
initial assumption: A user or a group of users have one or more digital photographs to be uploaded to the 
picture-sharing site. These photos are saved on either a tablet or a laptop computer. They have successfully logged on to KidsTakePics.
normal: The user chooses to upload photos and is prompted to select the photos to be uploaded on the 
computer and to select the project name under which the photos will be stored. Users should also be given the option of inputting keywords that should be associated with each uploaded photo. Uploaded photos are named by creating a conjunction of the user name with the filename of the photo on the local computer.
On completion of the upload, the system automatically sends an email to the project moderator, asking them to 
check new content, and generates an on-screen message to the user that this checking has been done.
What can go wrong: No moderator is associated with the selected project. An email is automatically generated to 
the school administrator asking them to nominate a project moderator. Users should be informed of a possible delay in making their photos visible.
Photos with the same name have already been uploaded by the same user. The user should be asked if he or she 
wishes to re-upload the photos with the same name, rename the photos, or cancel the upload. If users choose to re-upload the photos, the originals are overwritten. If they choose to rename the photos, a new name is automatically generated by adding a number to the existing filename.
other activities: The moderator may be logged on to the system and may approve photos as they are uploaded.
System state on completion: User is logged on. The selected photos have been uploaded and assigned a status “awaiting moderation.” Photos are visible to the moderator and to the user who uploaded them.

--- PAGE 121 (book page ~119) ---
  4.4 ■  Requirements  specification    121
System requirements are expanded versions of the user requirements that soft-
ware engineers use as the starting point for the system design. They add detail and 
explain how the system should provide the user requirements. They may be used as part of the contract for the implementation of the system and should therefore be a complete and detailed specification of the whole system.
Ideally, the system requirements should only describe the external behavior of the 
system and its operational constraints. They should not be concerned with how the system should be designed or implemented. However, at the level of detail required to completely specify a complex software system, it is neither possible nor desirable to exclude all design information. There are several reasons for this:
1.
 You may have to design an initial architecture of the system to help structure the 
requirements specification. The system requirements are organized according to the different subsystems that make up the system. We did this when we were defining the requirements for the iLearn system, where we proposed the archi-tecture shown in Figure 1.8.
2.
 In most cases, systems must interoperate with existing systems, which constrain the design and impose requirements on the new system.
3.
 The use of a specific architecture to satisfy non-functional requirements, such as N-version programming to achieve reliability, discussed in Chapter 11, may be necessary. An external regulator who needs to certify that the system is safe may specify that an architectural design that has already been certified should be used.
	 4.4.1 		 Natural 	language 	specification
Natural language has been used to write requirements for software since the 1950s. It is expressive, intuitive, and universal. It is also potentially vague and ambiguous, and its interpretation depends on the background of the reader. As a result, there Figure 4.11  Notations 
for writing system requirementsnotation Description
Natural language sentencesThe requirements are written using numbered sentences in natural language. Each sentence should express one requirement.
Structured natural languageThe requirements are written in natural language on a standard form or template. Each field provides information about an aspect of the requirement.
Graphical notations Graphical models, supplemented by text annotations, are used to define the functional requirements for the system. UML (unified modeling language) use case and sequence diagrams are commonly used.
Mathematical specificationsThese notations are based on mathematical concepts such as finite-state machines or sets. Although these unambiguous specifications can reduce the ambiguity in a requirements document, most customers don’t understand a formal specification. They cannot check that it represents what they want, and they are reluctant to accept it as a system contract. (I discuss this approach, in Chapter 10, which covers system dependability.)

--- PAGE 122 (book page ~120) ---
122    Chapter  4 ■  Requirements  engineering
have been many proposals for alternative ways to write requirements. However, 
none of these proposals has been widely adopted, and natural language will continue to be the most widely used way of specifying system and software requirements.
To minimize misunderstandings when writing natural language requirements, I 
recommend that you follow these simple guidelines:
1.
 Invent a standard format and ensure that all requirement definitions adhere to 
that format. Standardizing the format makes omissions less likely and requirements easier to check. I suggest that, wherever possible, you should write the requirement in one or two sentences of natural language.
2.
 Use language consistently to distinguish between mandatory and desirable requirements. Mandatory requirements are requirements that the system must support and are usually written using “shall.” Desirable requirements are not essential and are written using “should.”
3.
 Use text highlighting (bold, italic, or color) to pick out key parts of the requirement.
4. Do not assume that readers understand technical, software engineering language. It is easy for words such as “architecture” and “module” to be misunderstood. Wherever possible, you should avoid the use of jargon, abbreviations, and acronyms.
5.
 Whenever possible, you should try to associate a rationale with each user requirement. The rationale should explain why the requirement has been included and who proposed the requirement (the requirement source), so that you know whom to consult if the requirement has to be changed. Requirements rationale is particularly useful when requirements are changed, as it may help decide what changes would be undesirable.
Figure 4.12 illustrates how these guidelines may be used. It includes two require-
ments for the embedded software for the automated insulin pump, introduced in Chapter 1. Other requirements for this embedded system are defined in the insulin pump requirements document, which can be downloaded from the book’s web pages.
	 4.4.2 		 Structured 	specifications
Structured natural language is a way of writing system requirements where require-ments are written in a standard way rather than as free-form text. This approach maintains most of the expressiveness and understandability of natural language but Figure 4.12  Example 
requirements for the insulin pump software system3.2 The system shall measure the blood sugar and deliver insulin, if required, every 10 minutes. ( Changes in 
blood sugar are relatively slow, so more frequent measurement is unnecessary; less frequent measurement could lead to unnecessarily high sugar levels.)
3.6 The system shall run a self-test routine every minute with the conditions to be tested and the associated 
actions defined in Table 1. (A self-test routine can discover hardware and software problems and alert the user to the fact the normal operation may be impossible.)

--- PAGE 123 (book page ~121) ---
  4.4 ■  Requirements  specification    123
Problems with using natural language for requirements specification
The flexibility of natural language, which is so useful for specification, often causes problems. There is scope for 
writing unclear requirements, and readers (the designers) may misinterpret requirements because they have a different background to the user. It is easy to amalgamate several requirements into a single sentence, and structuring natural language requirements can be difficult.
http://software-engineering-book.com/web/natural-language/
ensures that some uniformity is imposed on the specification. Structured language notations use templates to specify system requirements. The specification may use programming language constructs to show alternatives and iteration, and may high-light key elements using shading or different fonts.
The Robertsons (Robertson and Robertson 2013), in their book on the VOLERE 
requirements engineering method, recommend that user requirements be initially written on cards, one requirement per card. They suggest a number of fields on each card, such as the requirements rationale, the dependencies on other requirements, the source of the requirements, and supporting materials. This is similar to the approach used in the example of a structured specification shown in Figure 4.13.
To use a structured approach to specifying system requirements, you define one 
or more standard templates for requirements and represent these templates as struc-tured forms. The specification may be structured around the objects manipulated by the system, the functions performed by the system, or the events processed by the system. An example of a form-based specification, in this case, one that defines how to calculate the dose of insulin to be delivered when the blood sugar is within a safe band, is shown in Figure 4.13.
When a standard format is used for specifying functional requirements, the fol-
lowing information should be included:
1.
 A description of the function or entity being specified.
2. A description of its inputs and the origin of these inputs.
3. A description of its outputs and the destination of these outputs.
4. Information about the information needed for the computation or other entities 
in the system that are required (the “requires” part).
5. A description of the action to be taken.
6. If a functional approach is used, a precondition setting out what must be true before the function is called, and a postcondition specifying what is true after the function is called.
7.
 A description of the side effects (if any) of the operation.
Using structured specifications removes some of the problems of natural  language 
specification. Variability in the specification is reduced, and requirements are  organized 

--- PAGE 124 (book page ~122) ---
124    Chapter  4 ■  Requirements  engineering
more effectively. However, it is still sometimes difficult to write requirements in a 
clear and unambiguous way, particularly when complex computations (e.g., how to calculate the insulin dose) are to be specified.
To address this problem, you can add extra information to natural language 
requirements, for example, by using tables or graphical models of the system. These can show how computations proceed, how the system state changes, how users inter-act with the system, and how sequences of actions are performed.
Tables are particularly useful when there are a number of possible alternative 
situations and you need to describe the actions to be taken for each of these. The insulin pump bases its computations of the insulin requirement on the rate of change of blood sugar levels. The rates of change are computed using the current and previ-ous readings. Figure 4.14 is a tabular description of how the rate of change of blood sugar is used to calculate the amount of insulin to be delivered.
Figure 4.14  The  
tabular specification  of computation in an insulin pump
condition action
Sugar level falling (r2 6 r1) CompDose = 0
Sugar level stable (r2 = r1) CompDose = 0
Sugar level increasing and rate of increase decreasing ((r2 - r1)<(r1 - r0))CompDose = 0
Sugar level increasing and rate of increase stable or increasing r2 7 r1 & ((r2 - r1) Ú (r1 − r0))CompDose = round ((r2 - r1)/4)If rounded result = 0 thenCompDose = MinimumDoseFigure 4.13  The 
structured specification of a requirement for  an insulin pumpInsulin Pump/Control Software/SRS/3.3.2
Function  Compute insulin dose: Safe sugar level.
Description   Computes the dose of insulin to be delivered when the current measured sugar level is in the 
safe zone between 3 and 7 units.
inputs  Current sugar reading (r2), the previous two readings (r0 and r1).
Source  Current sugar reading from sensor. Other readings from memory.
outputs  CompDose—the dose in insulin to be delivered.
Destination  Main control loop.
action:   CompDose is zero if the sugar level is stable or falling or if the level is increasing but the rate of increase is decreasing. If the level is increasing and the rate of increase is increasing, then CompDose is computed by dividing the difference between the current sugar level and the previous level by 4 and rounding the result. If the result, is rounded to zero then CompDose is set to the minimum dose that can be delivered. (see Figure 4.14)
requires  Two previous readings so that the rate of change of sugar level can be computed.
Precondition  The insulin reservoir contains at least the maximum allowed single dose of insulin.
Postcondition  r0 is replaced by r1 then r1 is replaced by r2.
Side effects  None.

--- PAGE 125 (book page ~123) ---
  4.4 ■  Requirements  specification    125
	 4.4.3 		 Use 	cases
Use cases are a way of describing interactions between users and a system using a 
graphical model and structured text. They were first introduced in the Objectory method (Jacobsen et al. 1993) and have now become a fundamental feature of the Unified Modeling Language (UML). In their simplest form, a use case identifies the actors involved in an interaction and names the type of interaction. You then add additional information describing the interaction with the system. The additional information may be a textual description or one or more graphical models such as the UML sequence or state charts (see Chapter 5).
Use cases are documented using a high-level use case diagram. The set of use 
cases represents all of the possible interactions that will be described in the system requirements. Actors in the process, who may be human or other systems, are repre-sented as stick figures. Each class of interaction is represented as a named ellipse. Lines link the actors with the interaction. Optionally, arrowheads may be added to lines to show how the interaction is initiated. This is illustrated in Figure 4.15, which shows some of the use cases for the Mentcare system.
Use cases identify the individual interactions between the system and its users or 
other systems. Each use case should be documented with a textual description. These can then be linked to other models in the UML that will develop the scenario in more detail. For example, a brief description of the Setup Consultation use case from Figure 4.15 might be:
Setup consultation allows two or more doctors, working in different offices, to view the same patient record at the same time. One doctor initiates the consul-tation by choosing the people involved from a dropdown menu of doctors who are online. The patient record is then displayed on their screens, but only the initiating doctor can edit the record. In addition, a text chat window is created NurseMedical receptionistManagerRegister
patient
View
personal info.
View recordGenerate
reportExport
statistics
DoctorEdit record
Setup
consultation Figure 4.15  Use cases 
for the Mentcare system

--- PAGE 126 (book page ~124) ---
126    Chapter  4 ■  Requirements  engineering
to help coordinate actions. It is assumed that a phone call for voice communi-
cation can be separately arranged.
The UML is a standard for object-oriented modeling, so use cases and use case-
based elicitation are used in the requirements engineering process. However, my 
experience with use cases is that they are too fine-grained to be useful in discussing requirements. Stakeholders don’t understand the term use case; they don’t find the graphical model to be useful, and they are often not interested in a detailed descrip-tion of each and every system interaction. Consequently, I find use cases to be more helpful in systems design than in requirements engineering. I discuss use cases fur-ther in Chapter 5, which shows how they are used alongside other system models to document a system design.
Some people think that each use case is a single, low-level interaction scenario. 
Others, such as Stevens and Pooley (Stevens and Pooley 2006), suggest that each use case includes a set of related, low-level scenarios. Each of these scenarios is a single thread through the use case. Therefore, there would be a scenario for the normal interaction plus scenarios for each possible exception. In practice, you can use them in either way.
	 4.4.4 		 The 	software 	requirements 	document
The software requirements document (sometimes called the software requirements specification or SRS) is an official statement of what the system developers should implement. It may include both the user requirements for a system and a detailed specification of the system requirements. Sometimes the user and system require-ments are integrated into a single description. In other cases, the user requirements are described in an introductory chapter in the system requirements specification.
Requirements documents are essential when systems are outsourced for development, 
when different teams develop different parts of the system, and when a detailed analysis of the requirements is mandatory. In other circumstances, such as software product or business system development, a detailed requirements document may not be needed.
Agile methods argue that requirements change so rapidly that a requirements 
document is out of date as soon as it is written, so the effort is largely wasted. Rather than a formal document, agile approaches often collect user requirements incremen-tally and write these on cards or whiteboards as short user stories. The user then prioritizes these stories for implementation in the next increment of the system.
For business systems where requirements are unstable, I think that this approach 
is a good one. However, I think that it is still useful to write a short supporting docu-ment that defines the business and dependability requirements for the system; it is easy to forget the requirements that apply to the system as a whole when focusing on the functional requirements for the next system release.
The requirements document has a diverse set of users, ranging from the senior 
management of the organization that is paying for the system to the engineers responsible for developing the software. Figure 4.16 shows possible users of the document and how they use it.

--- PAGE 127 (book page ~125) ---
  4.4 ■  Requirements  specification    127
Use the requirements to
develop validation tests forthe system.Use the requirementsdocument to plan a bid forthe system and to plan thesystem development process.
Use the requirements tounderstand what system isto be developed.
System test
engineersManagers
System
engineersSpecify the requirements andread them to check that theymeet their needs. Customersspecify changes to therequirements.System
customers
Use the requirements tounderstand the system andthe relationships between itsparts.System
maintenance
engineers
Figure 4.16  Users of a 
requirements document
The diversity of possible users means that the requirements document has to be a 
compromise. It has to describe the requirements for customers, define the require-ments in precise detail for developers and testers, as well as include information about future system evolution. Information on anticipated changes helps system designers to avoid restrictive design decisions and maintenance engineers to adapt the system to new requirements.
The level of detail that you should include in a requirements document depends 
on the type of system that is being developed and the development process used. Critical systems need detailed requirements because safety and security have to be analyzed in detail to find possible requirements errors. When the system is to be developed by a separate company (e.g., through outsourcing), the system specifica-tions need to be detailed and precise. If an in-house, iterative development process is used, the requirements document can be less detailed. Details can be added to the requirements and ambiguities resolved during development of the system.
Figure 4.17 shows one possible organization for a requirements document that is 
based on an IEEE standard for requirements documents (IEEE 1998). This standard is a generic one that can be adapted to specific uses. In this case, the standard has been extended to include information about predicted system evolution. This infor-mation helps the maintainers of the system and allows designers to include support for future system features.

--- PAGE 128 (book page ~126) ---
128    Chapter  4 ■  Requirements  engineering
Figure 4.17  The 
structure of a 
requirements  documentchapter Description
Preface This defines the expected readership of the document and describe its version history, including a rationale for the creation of a new version and a summary of the changes made in each version.
Introduction This describes the need for the system. It should briefly describe the system’s functions 
and explain how it will work with other systems. It should also describe how the system fits into the overall business or strategic objectives of the organization commissioning the software.
Glossary This defines the technical terms used in the document. You should not make assumptions about the experience or expertise of the reader.
User requirements definitionHere, you describe the services provided for the user. The nonfunctional system requirements should also be described in this section. This description may use natural language, diagrams, or other notations that are understandable to customers. Product and process standards that must be followed should be specified.
System architectureThis chapter presents a high-level overview of the anticipated system architecture, showing the distribution of functions across system modules. Architectural components that are reused should be highlighted.
System requirements specificationThis describes the functional and nonfunctional requirements in more detail. If necessary, further detail may also be added to the nonfunctional requirements. Interfaces to other systems may be defined.
System modelsThis chapter includes graphical system models showing the relationships between the system components and the system and its environment. Examples of possible models are object models, data-flow models, or semantic data models.
System evolutionThis describes the fundamental assumptions on which the system is based, and any anticipated changes due to hardware evolution, changing user needs, and so on. This section is useful for system designers as it may help them avoid design decisions that would constrain likely future changes to the system.
Appendices These provide detailed, specific information that is related to the application being developed—for example, hardware and database descriptions. Hardware requirements define the minimal and optimal configurations for the system. Database requirements define the logical organization of the data used by the system and the relationships between data.
Index Several indexes to the document may be included. As well as a normal alphabetic index, there may be an index of diagrams, an index of functions, and so on.
Naturally, the information included in a requirements document depends on the 
type of software being developed and the approach to development that is to be used. A requirements document with a structure like that shown in Figure 4.17 might be produced for a complex engineering system that includes hardware and software developed by different companies. The requirements document is likely to be long and detailed. It is therefore important that a comprehensive table of contents and doc-ument index be included so that readers can easily find the information they need.
By contrast, the requirements document for an in-house software product will 
leave out many of detailed chapters suggested above. The focus will be on defining the user requirements and high-level, nonfunctional system requirements. The sys-tem designers and programmers use their judgment to decide how to meet the out-line user requirements for the system.

--- PAGE 129 (book page ~127) ---
  4.5 ■  Requirements  validation    129
	 4.5		Requirements 	validation
Requirements validation is the process of checking that requirements define the sys-
tem that the customer really wants. It overlaps with elicitation and analysis, as it is concerned with finding problems with the requirements. Requirements validation is critically important because errors in a requirements document can lead to extensive rework costs when these problems are discovered during development or after the system is in service.
The cost of fixing a requirements problem by making a system change is usually 
much greater than repairing design or coding errors. A change to the requirements usually means that the system design and implementation must also be changed. Furthermore, the system must then be retested.
During the requirements validation process, different types of checks should be 
carried out on the requirements in the requirements document. These checks include:
1.
 Validity checks These check that the requirements reflect the real needs of sys-
tem users. Because of changing circumstances, the user requirements may have changed since they were originally elicited.
2.
 Consistency checks Requirements in the document should not conflict. That is, there should not be contradictory constraints or different descriptions of the same system function.
3.
 Completeness checks The requirements document should include requirements that define all functions and the constraints intended by the system user.
4.
 Realism checks By using knowledge of existing technologies, the requirements should be checked to ensure that they can be implemented within the proposed budget for the system. These checks should also take account of the budget and schedule for the system development.
5.
 Verifiability To reduce the potential for dispute between customer and contrac-
tor, system requirements should always be written so that they are verifiable. This means that you should be able to write a set of tests that can demonstrate that the delivered system meets each specified requirement.requirements document standards
A number of large organizations, such as the U.S. Department of Defense and the IEEE, have defined standards for requirements documents. These are usually very generic but are nevertheless useful as a basis for develop-ing more detailed organizational standards. The U.S. Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE) is one of the best-known standards providers, and they have developed a standard for the structure of requirements documents. This standard is most appropriate for systems such as military command and control systems that have a long lifetime and are usually developed by a group of organizations.
http://software-engineering-book.com/web/requirements-standard/

--- PAGE 130 (book page ~128) ---
130    Chapter  4 ■  Requirements  engineering
A number of requirements validation techniques can be used individually or in 
conjunction with one another:
1. Requirements reviews The requirements are analyzed systematically by a team 
of reviewers who check for errors and inconsistencies.
2. Prototyping This involves developing an executable model of a system and 
using this with end-users and customers to see if it meets their needs and expec-tations. Stakeholders experiment with the system and feed back requirements changes to the development team.
3.
 Test-case generation Requirements should be testable. If the tests for the requirements are devised as part of the validation process, this often reveals requirements problems. If a test is difficult or impossible to design, this usually means that the requirements will be difficult to implement and should be recon-sidered. Developing tests from the user requirements before any code is written is an integral part of test-driven development.
You should not underestimate the problems involved in requirements validation. 
Ultimately, it is difficult to show that a set of requirements does in fact meet a user’s needs. Users need to picture the system in operation and imagine how that system would fit into their work. It is hard even for skilled computer professionals to per-form this type of abstract analysis and harder still for system users.
As a result, you rarely find all requirements problems during the requirements 
validation process. Inevitably, further requirements changes will be needed to cor-rect omissions and misunderstandings after agreement has been reached on the requirements document.
	 4.6		Requirements 	change
The requirements for large software systems are always changing. One reason for the frequent changes is that these systems are often developed to address “wicked” problems—problems that cannot be completely defined (Rittel and Webber 1973). Because the problem cannot be fully defined, the software requirements are bound to requirements reviews
A requirements review is a process in which a group of people from the system customer and the system devel-oper read the requirements document in detail and check for errors, anomalies, and inconsistencies. Once these have been detected and recorded, it is then up to the customer and the developer to negotiate how the identi-fied problems should be solved.
http://software-engineering-book.com/web/requirements-reviews/

--- PAGE 131 (book page ~129) ---
  4.6 ■  Requirements  change    131
be incomplete. During the software development process, the stakeholders’ under-
standing of the problem is constantly changing (Figure 4.18). The system require-ments must then evolve to reflect this changed problem understanding.
Once a system has been installed and is regularly used, new requirements inevita-
bly emerge. This is partly a consequence of errors and omissions in the original requirements that have to be corrected. However, most changes to system require-ments arise because of changes to the business environment of the system:
1.
 The business and technical environment of the system always changes after 
installation. New hardware may be introduced and existing hardware updated. It may be necessary to interface the system with other systems. Business priorities may change (with consequent changes in the system support required), and new legislation and regulations may be introduced that require system compliance.
2.
 The people who pay for a system and the users of that system are rarely the same people. System customers impose requirements because of organizational and budgetary constraints. These may conflict with end-user requirements, and, after delivery, new features may have to be added for user support if the system is to meet its goals.
3.
 Large systems usually have a diverse stakeholder community, with stakeholders having different requirements. Their priorities may be conflicting or contradic-tory. The final system requirements are inevitably a compromise, and some stakeholders have to be given priority. With experience, it is often discovered that the balance of support given to different stakeholders has to be changed and the requirements re-prioritized.
As requirements are evolving, you need to keep track of individual requirements 
and maintain links between dependent requirements so that you can assess the impact of requirements changes. You therefore need a formal process for making change proposals and linking these to system requirements. This process of “require-ments management” should start as soon as a draft version of the requirements docu-ment is available.
Agile development processes have been designed to cope with requirements that 
change during the development process. In these processes, when a user proposes a requirements change, this change does not go through a formal change management TimeChanged
understanding
of problemInitial
understanding
of problem
Changed
requirementsInitial
requirements
Figure 4.18   
Requirements evolution

--- PAGE 132 (book page ~130) ---
132    Chapter  4 ■  Requirements  engineering
process. Rather, the user has to prioritize that change and, if it is high priority, decide 
what system features that were planned for the next iteration should be dropped for the change to be implemented.
The problem with this approach is that users are not necessarily the best people to 
decide on whether or not a requirements change is cost-effective. In systems with multiple stakeholders, changes will benefit some stakeholders and not others. It is often better for an independent authority, who can balance the needs of all stake -
holders, to decide on the changes that should be accepted.
	 4.6.1 		 Requirements 	management 	planning
Requirements management planning is concerned with establishing how a set of evolving requirements will be managed. During the planning stage, you have to decide on a number of issues:
1.
 Requirements identification Each requirement must be uniquely identified so 
that it can be cross-referenced with other requirements and used in traceability assessments.
2.
 A change management process This is the set of activities that assess the impact and cost of changes. I discuss this process in more detail in the following section.
3.
 Traceability policies These policies define the relationships between each require-ment and between the requirements and the system design that should be recorded. The traceability policy should also define how these records should be maintained.
4.
 Tool support Requirements management involves the processing of large amounts of information about the requirements. Tools that may be used range from specialist requirements management systems to shared spreadsheets and simple database systems.
Requirements management needs automated support, and the software tools for 
this should be chosen during the planning phase. You need tool support for:
1.
 Requirements storage The requirements should be maintained in a secure, man-
aged data store that is accessible to everyone involved in the requirements engi-neering process.enduring and volatile requirements
Some requirements are more susceptible to change than others. Enduring requirements are the requirements that are associated with the core, slow-to-change activities of an organization. Enduring requirements are asso-ciated with fundamental work activities. Volatile requirements are more likely to change. They are usually asso-ciated with supporting activities that reflect how the organization does its work rather than the work itself.
http://software-engineering-book.com/web/changing-requirements/

--- PAGE 133 (book page ~131) ---
  4.6 ■  Requirements  change    133
2. Change management The process of change management (Figure 4.19) is sim-
plified if active tool support is available. Tools can keep track of suggested changes and responses to these suggestions.
3.
 Traceability management As discussed above, tool support for traceability allows related requirements to be discovered. Some tools are available which use natural language processing techniques to help discover possible relation -
ships between requirements.
For small systems, you do not need to use specialized requirements management 
tools. Requirements management can be supported using shared web documents, spreadsheets, and databases. However, for larger systems, more specialized tool sup-port, using systems such as DOORS (IBM 2013), makes it much easier to keep track of a large number of changing requirements.
	 4.6.2 		 Requirements 	change 	management
Requirements change management (Figure 4.19) should be applied to all proposed 
changes to a system’s requirements after the requirements document has been approved. Change management is essential because you need to decide if the benefits of imple-menting new requirements are justified by the costs of implementation. The advantage of using a formal process for change management is that all change proposals are treated consistently and changes to the requirements document are made in a controlled way.
There are three principal stages to a change management process:
1.
 Problem analysis and change specification The process starts with an identi-fied requirements problem or, sometimes, with a specific change proposal. During this stage, the problem or the change proposal is analyzed to check that it is valid. This analysis is fed back to the change requestor who may respond with a more specific requirements change proposal, or decide to withdraw the request.
2.
 Change analysis and costing The effect of the proposed change is assessed using traceability information and general knowledge of the system require-ments. The cost of making the change is estimated in terms of modifications to the requirements document and, if appropriate, to the system design and imple-mentation. Once this analysis is completed, a decision is made as to whether or not to proceed with the requirements change.Change
implementationChange analysis
and costingProblem analysis and
change specificationIdentified
problemRevised
requirements
Figure 4.19   
Requirements change management

--- PAGE 134 (book page ~132) ---
134    Chapter  4 ■  Requirements  engineering
3. Change implementation The requirements document and, where necessary, the 
system design and implementation, are modified. You should organize the requirements document so that you can make changes to it without extensive rewriting or reorganization. As with programs, changeability in documents is achieved by minimizing external references and making the document sections as modular as possible. Thus, individual sections can be changed and replaced without affecting other parts of the document.
If a new requirement has to be urgently implemented, there is always a tempta-
tion to change the system and then retrospectively modify the requirements docu -
ment. This almost inevitably leads to the requirements specification and the system implementation getting out of step. Once system changes have been made, it is easy to forget to include these changes in the requirements document. In some circum-stances, emergency changes to a system have to be made. In those cases, it is impor-tant that you update the requirements document as soon as possible in order to include the revised requirements.
Key Points
■ Requirements for a software system set out what the system should do and define constraints 
on its operation and implementation.
■ Functional requirements are statements of the services that the system must provide or are descriptions of how some computations must be carried out.
■ Non-functional requirements often constrain the system being developed and the development process being used. These might be product requirements, organizational requirements, or external requirements. They often relate to the emergent properties of the system and therefore apply to the system as a whole.
■ The requirements engineering process includes requirements elicitation, requirements specification, requirements validation, and requirements management.
■ Requirements elicitation is an iterative process that can be represented as a spiral of activities—requirements discovery, requirements classification and organization, requirements negotiation, and requirements documentation.requirements traceability
You need to keep track of the relationships between requirements, their sources, and the system design so that 
you can analyze the reasons for proposed changes and the impact that these changes are likely to have on other parts of the system. You need to be able to trace how a change ripples its way through the system. Why?
http://software-engineering-book.com/web/traceability/

--- PAGE 139 (book page ~137) ---
	 Chapter 	5	■	System 	modeling 	 	139
System modeling is the process of developing abstract models of a system, with each 
model presenting a different view or perspective of that system. System modeling now usually means representing a system using some kind of graphical notation based on diagram types in the Unified Modeling Language (UML). However, it is also possible to develop formal (mathematical) models of a system, usually as a detailed system specification. I cover graphical modeling using the UML here, and formal modeling is briefly discussed in Chapter 10.
Models are used during the requirements engineering process to help derive the 
detailed requirements for a system, during the design process to describe the system to engineers implementing the system, and after implementation to document the system’s structure and operation. You may develop models of both the existing sys-tem and the system to be developed:
1.
 Models of the existing system are used during requirements engineering. They 
help clarify what the existing system does, and they can be used to focus a stake-holder discussion on its strengths and weaknesses.
2.
 Models of the new system are used during requirements engineering to help explain the proposed requirements to other system stakeholders. Engineers use these models to discuss design proposals and to document the system for imple-mentation. If you use a model-driven engineering process (Brambilla, Cabot, and Wimmer 2012), you can generate a complete or partial system implementa-tion from system models.
It is important to understand that a system model is not a complete representation of 
system. It purposely leaves out detail to make it easier to understand. A model is an abstraction of the system being studied rather than an alternative representation of that system. A representation of a system should maintain all the information about the entity being represented. An abstraction deliberately simplifies a system design and picks out the most salient characteristics. For example, the PowerPoint slides that accompany this book are an abstraction of the book’s key points. However, if the book were translated 
from English into Italian, this would be an alternative 
 representation. The translator’s 
intention would be to maintain all the information as it is presented in English.
You may develop different models to represent the system from different 
 perspectives. For example:
1. An external perspective, where you model the context or environment of the 
system.
2. An interaction perspective, where you model the interactions between a system and its environment, or between the components of a system.
3.
 A structural perspective, where you model the organization of a system or the structure of the data processed by the system.
4.
 A behavioral perspective, where you model the dynamic behavior of the system and how it responds to events.

--- PAGE 140 (book page ~138) ---
140	 	Chapter 	5	■	System 	modeling
When developing system models, you can often be flexible in the way that the 
graphical notation is used. You do not always need to stick rigidly to the details of a 
notation. The detail and rigor of a model depend on how you intend to use it. There are three ways in which graphical models are commonly used:
1.
 As a way to stimulate and focus discussion about an existing or proposed sys-
tem. The purpose of the model is to stimulate and focus discussion among the software engineers involved in developing the system. The models may be incomplete (as long as they cover the key points of the discussion), and they may use the modeling notation informally. This is how models are normally used in agile modeling (Ambler and Jeffries 2002).
2.
 As a way of documenting an existing system. When models are used as docu-mentation, they do not have to be complete, as you may only need to use models to document some parts of a system. However, these models have to be 
 correct—
they should use the notation correctly and be an accurate description of the 
 system.
3. As a detailed system description that can be used to generate a system imple-mentation. Where models are used as part of a model-based development pro-cess, the system models have to be both complete and correct. They are used as a basis for generating the source code of the system, and you therefore have to be very careful not to confuse similar symbols, such as stick and block arrow-heads, that may have different meanings.
In this chapter, I use diagrams defined in the Unified Modeling Language 
(UML) (Rumbaugh, Jacobson, and Booch 2004; Booch, Rumbaugh, and Jacobson 2005), which has become a standard language for object-oriented mod-eling. The UML has 13 diagram types and so supports the creation of many 
 different types of system model. However, a survey (Erickson and Siau 2007) showed that most users of the UML thought that five diagram types could repre-sent the essentials of a system. I therefore concentrate on these five UML 
 diagram 
types here:The Unified Modeling Language
The Unified Modeling Language (UML) is a set of 13 different diagram types that may be used to model soft-ware systems. It emerged from work in the 1990s on object-oriented modeling, where similar object-oriented notations were integrated to create the UML. A major revision (UML 2) was finalized in 2004. The UML is uni-versally accepted as the standard approach for developing models of software systems. Variants, such as SysML, have been proposed for more general system modeling.
http://software-engineering-book.com/web/uml/

--- PAGE 141 (book page ~139) ---
	 5.1	■	Context 	models 	 	141
1. Activity diagrams, which show the activities involved in a process or in data 
processing.
2. Use case diagrams, which show the interactions between a system and its 
 environment.
3. Sequence diagrams, which show interactions between actors and the system and between system components.
4.
 Class diagrams, which show the object classes in the system and the associa-tions between these classes.
5.
 State diagrams, which show how the system reacts to internal and external events.
	 5.1		Context 	models
At an early stage in the specification of a system, you should decide on the system boundaries, that is, on what is and is not part of the system being developed. This involves working with system stakeholders to decide what functionality should be included in the system and what processing and operations should be carried out in the system’s operational environment. You may decide that automated support for some business processes should be implemented in the software being developed but that other processes should be manual or supported by different systems. You should look at possible overlaps in functionality with existing systems and decide where new functionality should be implemented. These decisions should be made early in the process to limit the system costs and the time needed for understanding the sys-tem requirements and design.
In some cases, the boundary between a system and its environment is relatively 
clear. For example, where an automated system is replacing an existing manual or computerized system, the environment of the new system is usually the same as the existing system’s environment. In other cases, there is more flexibility, and you decide what constitutes the boundary between the system and its environment during the requirements engineering process.
For example, say you are developing the specification for the Mentcare patient 
information system. This system is intended to manage information about patients attending mental health clinics and the treatments that have been prescribed. In devel-oping the specification for this system, you have to decide whether the system should focus exclusively on collecting information about consultations (using other systems to collect personal information about patients) or whether it should also 
 collect per-
sonal patient information. The advantage of relying on other systems for patient information is that you avoid duplicating data. The major disadvantage, 
 however, is 
that using other systems may make it slower to access information, and if these sys-tems are unavailable, then it may be impossible to use the Mentcare 
 system.
In some situations, the user base for a system is very diverse, and users have a 
wide range of different system requirements. You may decide not to define 

--- PAGE 142 (book page ~140) ---
142	 	Chapter 	5	■	System 	modeling
 boundaries explicitly but instead to develop a configurable system that can be 
adapted to the needs of different users. This was the approach that we adopted in the iLearn systems, introduced in Chapter 1. There, users range from very young 
 children who can’t read through to young adults, their teachers, and school adminis-trators. Because these groups need different system boundaries, we specified a 
 configuration system that would allow the boundaries to be specified when the 
 system was deployed.
The definition of a system boundary is not a value-free judgment. Social and 
organizational concerns may mean that the position of a system boundary may be determined by nontechnical factors. For example, a system boundary may be delib-erately positioned so that the complete analysis process can be carried out on one site; it may be chosen so that a particularly difficult manager need not be consulted; and it may be positioned so that the system cost is increased and the system develop-ment division must therefore expand to design and implement the system.
Once some decisions on the boundaries of the system have been made, part of the 
analysis activity is the definition of that context and the dependencies that a system has on its environment. Normally, producing a simple architectural model is the first step in this activity.
Figure 5.1 is a context model that shows the Mentcare system and the other 
systems in its environment. You can see that the Mentcare system is connected to an appointments system and a more general patient record system with which it shares data. The system is also connected to systems for management reporting and hospital admissions, and a statistics system that collects information for research. Finally, it makes use of a prescription system to generate prescriptions for patients’ medication.
Context models normally show that the environment includes several other auto-
mated systems. However, they do not show the types of relationships between the systems in the environment and the system that is being specified. External systems might produce data for or consume data from the system. They might share data with the system, or they might be connected directly, through a network or not connected at all. They might be physically co-located or located in separate buildings. All of «system»
Mentcare«system»
Patient record
system
«system»
Appointments
system«system»
Admissions
system«system»
Management
reporting
system
«system»
Prescription
system«system»
HC statistics
system
Figure 5.1  The context 
of the Mentcare system

--- PAGE 143 (book page ~141) ---
	 5.1	■	Context 	models 	 	143
Confirm
detention
decision Find secure
place
Admit to
hospitalTransfer to
police station
Transfer to
secure hospital
Inform next
of kinInform
social care
Inform
patient of
rights
Update
register
«system»
Admissions
system«system»
Mentcare
«system»
MentcareRecord
detention
decision[dangerous][not available]
[not
dangerous][available]
Figure 5.2  A process 
model of involuntary 
detentionthese relations may affect the requirements and design of the system being defined and so must be taken into account. Therefore, simple context models are used along with other models, such as business process models. These describe human and auto-mated processes in which particular software systems are used.
UML activity diagrams may be used to show the business processes in which 
systems are used. Figure 5.2 is a UML activity diagram that shows where the Mentcare system is used in an important mental health care process—involuntary detention.
Sometimes, patients who are suffering from mental health problems may be a 
danger to others or to themselves. They may therefore have to be detained against their will in a hospital so that treatment can be administered. Such detention is sub-ject to strict legal safeguards—for example, the decision to detain a patient must be regularly reviewed so that people are not held indefinitely without good reason. One critical function of the Mentcare system is to ensure that such safeguards are imple-mented and that the rights of patients are respected.
UML activity diagrams show the activities in a process and the flow of control 
from one activity to another. The start of a process is indicated by a filled circle, the end by a filled circle inside another circle. Rectangles with round corners represent activities, that is, the specific subprocesses that must be carried out. You may include objects in activity charts. Figure 5.2 shows the systems that are used to support dif-ferent subprocesses within the involuntary detection process. I have shown that these are separate systems by using the UML stereotype feature where the type of entity in the box between chevrons is shown.
Arrows represent the flow of work from one activity to another, and a solid bar 
indicates activity coordination. When the flow from more than one activity leads to a 

--- PAGE 144 (book page ~142) ---
144	 	Chapter 	5	■	System 	modeling
solid bar, then all of these activities must be complete before progress is possible. 
When the flow from a solid bar leads to a number of activities, these may be exe-cuted in parallel. Therefore, in Figure 5.2, the activities to inform social care and the patient’s next of kin, as well as to update the detention register, may be concurrent.
Arrows may be annotated with guards (in square brackets) that specify when that 
flow is followed. In Figure 5.2, you can see guards showing the flows for patients who are dangerous and not dangerous to society. Patients who are dangerous to soci-ety must be detained in a secure facility. However, patients who are suicidal and are a danger to themselves may be admitted to an appropriate ward in a hospital, where they can be kept under close supervision.
	 5.2		Interaction 	models
All systems involve interaction of some kind. This can be user interaction, which involves user inputs and outputs; interaction between the software being developed and other systems in its environment; or interaction between the components of a software system. User interaction modeling is important as it helps to identify user requirements. Modeling system-to-system interaction highlights the communication problems that may arise. Modeling component interaction helps us understand if a proposed system structure is likely to deliver the required system performance and dependability.
This section discusses two related approaches to interaction modeling:
1.
 Use case modeling, which is mostly used to model interactions between a sys-tem and external agents (human users or other systems).
2.
 Sequence diagrams, which are used to model interactions between system com-ponents, although external agents may also be included.
Use case models and sequence diagrams present interactions at different levels of 
detail and so may be used together. For example, the details of the interactions involved in a high-level use case may be documented in a sequence diagram. The UML also includes communication diagrams that can be used to model interactions. I don’t describe this diagram type because communication diagrams are simply an alternative representation of sequence diagrams.
 5.2.1  Use case modeling
Use case modeling was originally developed by Ivar Jacobsen in the 1990s (Jacobsen et al. 1993), and a UML diagram type to support use case modeling is part of the Medical receptionist Patient record systemTransfer data
Figure 5.3  Transfer-data 
use case 

--- PAGE 145 (book page ~143) ---
	 5.2	■	Interaction 	models 	 	145
UML. A use case can be taken as a simple description of what a user expects from a 
system in that interaction. I have discussed use cases for requirements elicitation in Chapter 4. As I said in Chapter 4, I find use case models to be more useful in the early stages of system design rather than in requirements engineering.
Each use case represents a discrete task that involves external interaction with a 
system. In its simplest form, a use case is shown as an ellipse, with the actors involved in the use case represented as stick figures. Figure 5.3 shows a use case from the Mentcare system that represents the task of uploading data from the Mentcare system to a more general patient record system. This more general system maintains summary data about a patient rather than data about each consultation, which is recorded in the Mentcare system.
Notice that there are two actors in this use case—the operator who is transferring 
the data and the patient record system. The stick figure notation was originally devel-oped to cover human interaction, but it is also used to represent other external sys-tems and hardware. Formally, use case diagrams should use lines without arrows as arrows in the UML indicate the direction of flow of messages. Obviously, in a use case, messages pass in both directions. However, the arrows in Figure 5.3 are used informally to indicate that the medical receptionist initiates the transaction and data is transferred to the patient record system.
Use case diagrams give a simple overview of an interaction, and you need to add 
more detail for complete interaction description. This detail can either be a simple textual description, a structured description in a table, or a sequence diagram. You choose the most appropriate format depending on the use case and the level of detail that you think is required in the model. I find a standard tabular format to be the most useful. Figure 5.4 shows a tabular description of the “Transfer data” use case.
Composite use case diagrams show a number of different use cases. Sometimes it 
is possible to include all possible interactions within a system in a single composite use case diagram. However, this may be impossible because of the number of use cases. In such cases, you may develop several diagrams, each of which shows related use cases. For example, Figure 5.5 shows all of the use cases in the Mentcare system Figure 5.4  Tabular 
description of the Transfer-data use caseMentcare system: Transfer data
Actors Medical receptionist, Patient records system (PRS)
Description A receptionist may transfer data from the Mentcare system to a 
general patient record database that is maintained by a health 
authority. The information transferred may either be updated personal information (address, phone number, etc.) or a summary of the patient’s diagnosis and treatment.
Data Patient’s personal information, treatment summary
Stimulus User command issued by medical receptionist
Response Confirmation that PRS has been updated
Comments The receptionist must have appropriate security permissions to 
access the patient information and the PRS.

--- PAGE 146 (book page ~144) ---
146	 	Chapter 	5	■	System 	modeling
in which the actor “Medical Receptionist” is involved. Each of these should be 
accompanied by a more detailed description.
The UML includes a number of constructs for sharing all or part of a use case in 
other use case diagrams. While these constructs can sometimes be helpful for system designers, my experience is that many people, especially end-users, find them diffi -
cult to understand. For this reason, these constructs are not described here.
 5.2.2  Sequence diagrams
Sequence diagrams in the UML are primarily used to model the interactions between the actors and the objects in a system and the interactions between the objects them-selves. The UML has a rich syntax for sequence diagrams, which allows many dif-ferent kinds of interaction to be modeled. As space does not allow covering all possibilities here, the focus will be on the basics of this diagram type.
As the name implies, a sequence diagram shows the sequence of interactions that 
take place during a particular use case or use case instance. Figure 5.6 is an example of a sequence diagram that illustrates the basics of the notation. This diagram models the interactions involved in the View patient information use case, where a medical receptionist can see some patient information.
The objects and actors involved are listed along the top of the diagram, with a 
dotted line drawn vertically from these. Annotated arrows indicate interactions between objects. The rectangle on the dotted lines indicates the lifeline of the object concerned (i.e., the time that object instance is involved in the computation). You read the sequence of interactions from top to bottom. The annotations on the arrows indicate the calls to the objects, their parameters, and the return values. This example also shows the notation used to denote alternatives. A box named alt is used with the Medical
receptionistRegister
patient
Transfer data
Contact
patientView patient
info.Unregister
patient
Figure 5.5  Use cases 
involving the role “Medical receptionist”

--- PAGE 147 (book page ~145) ---
	 5.2	■	Interaction 	models 	 	147
conditions indicated in square brackets, with alternative interaction options sepa-
rated by a dotted line.
You can read Figure 5.6 as follows:
1. The medical receptionist triggers the ViewInfo method in an instance P of the PatientInfo object class, supplying the patient’s identifier, PID to identify the required information. P is a user interface object, which is displayed as a form showing patient information.
2.
 The instance P calls the database to return the information required, supplying the receptionist’s identifier to allow security checking. (At this stage, it is not important where the receptionist’s UID comes from.)
3.
 The database checks with an authorization system that the receptionist is author-ized for this action.
4.
 If authorized, the patient information is returned and is displayed on a form on the user’s screen. If authorization fails, then an error message is returned. The box denoted by “alt” in the top-left corner is a choice box indicating that one of the contained interactions will be executed. The condition that selects the choice is shown in square brackets.
Figure 5.7 is a further example of a sequence diagram from the same system that 
illustrates two additional features. These are the direct communication between the actors in the system and the creation of objects as part of a sequence of operations. In this example, an object of type Summary is created to hold the summary data that is P: PatientInfo
ViewInfo ( PID)report (Info, PID ,
UID)
authorize (Info,
UID)
Patient infoD: Mentcare-DB AS: Authorization
authorization
Error (no access)[authorization OK]
[authorization fail]Medical Receptionist
alt
Figure 5.6  Sequence 
diagram for View patient 
information 

--- PAGE 148 (book page ~146) ---
148	 	Chapter 	5	■	System 	modeling
to be uploaded to a national PRS (patient records system). You can read this diagram 
as follows:
1. The receptionist logs on to the PRS.
2. Two options are available (as shown in the “alt” box). These allow the direct 
transfer of updated patient information from the Mentcare database to the PRS and the transfer of summary health data from the Mentcare database to the PRS.
3.
 In each case, the receptionist’s permissions are checked using the authorization system.P: PatientInfo
login ( )D: Mentcare-DB AS: Authorization
authorization[sendInfo]
[sendSummary]Medical ReceptionistPRS
ok
updateInfo( )update PRS (UID )
update (PID )
update OKMessage (OK)summarize ( UID )authorize (TF, UID )
authorizationauthorize (TF, UID)
:summary
update (PID )UpdateSummary( )
logout ()alt
update OKMessage (OK)
Figure 5.7  Sequence 
diagram for Transfer Data 

--- PAGE 149 (book page ~147) ---
	 5.3	■	Structural 	models 	 	149
4. Personal information may be transferred directly from the user interface object 
to the PRS. Alternatively, a summary record may be created from the database, and that record is then transferred.
5.
 On completion of the transfer, the PRS issues a status message and the user logs off.
Unless you are using sequence diagrams for code generation or detailed docu -
mentation, you don’t have to include every interaction in these diagrams. If you develop system models early in the development process to support requirements engineering and high-level design, there will be many interactions that depend on implementation decisions. For example, in Figure 5.7 the decision on how to get the user identifier to check authorization is one that can be delayed. In an implementa-tion, this might involve interacting with a User object. As this is not important at this stage, you do not need to include it in the sequence diagram.
	 5.3		Structural 	models
Structural models of software display the organization of a system in terms of the components that make up that system and their relationships. Structural models may be static models, which show the organization of the system design, or dynamic models, which show the organization of the system when it is executing. These are not the same things—the dynamic organization of a system as a set of interacting threads may be very different from a static model of the system components.
You create structural models of a system when you are discussing and designing 
the system architecture. These can be models of the overall system architecture or more detailed models of the objects in the system and their relationships.
In this section, I focus on the use of class diagrams for modeling the static struc-
ture of the object classes in a software system. Architectural design is an important topic in software engineering, and UML component, package, and deployment dia-grams may all be used when presenting architectural models. I cover architectural modeling in Chapters 6 and 17. 
 5.3.1  Class diagrams
Class diagrams are used when developing an object-oriented system model to show the classes in a system and the associations between these classes. Loosely, an object class can be thought of as a general definition of one kind of system object. An asso-ciation is a link between classes indicating that some relationship exists between these classes. Consequently, each class may have to have some knowledge of its associated class.
When you are developing models during the early stages of the software engi-
neering process, objects represent something in the real world, such as a patient, a 

--- PAGE 197 (book page ~195) ---
	 Chapter 	7	■	Design 	and	implementation 		197
Software design and implementation is the stage in the software engineering process 
at which an executable software system is developed. For some simple systems, software engineering means software design and implementation and all other soft-ware engineering activities are merged with this process. However, for large sys-tems, software design and implementation is only one of a number of software engineering processes (requirements engineering, verification and validation, etc.).
Software design and implementation activities are invariably interleaved. Software 
design is a creative activity in which you identify software components and their 
 relationships, based on a customer’s requirements. Implementation is the process of realizing the design as a program. Sometimes there is a separate design stage, and this design is modeled and documented. At other times, a design is in the programmer’s head or roughly sketched on a whiteboard or sheets of paper. Design is about how to solve a problem, so there is always a design process. However, it isn’t always neces -
sary or appropriate to describe the design in detail using the UML or other design description language.
Design and implementation are closely linked, and you should normally take 
implementation issues into account when developing a design. For example, using the UML to document a design may be the right thing to do if you are programming in an object-oriented language such as Java or C#. It is less useful, I think, if you are developing using a dynamically typed language like Python. There is no point in using the UML if you are implementing your system by configuring an off-the-shelf package. As I discussed in Chapter 3, agile methods usually work from informal 
sketches of the design and leave design decisions to programmers.
One of the most important implementation decisions that has to be made at an 
early stage of a software project is whether to build or to buy the application soft-ware. For many types of application, it is now possible to buy off-the-shelf applica-tion systems that can be adapted and tailored to the users’ requirements. For example, if you want to implement a medical records system, you can buy a package that is already used in hospitals. It is usually cheaper and faster to use this approach rather than developing a new system in a conventional programming language.
When you develop an application system by reusing an off-the-shelf product, the 
design process focuses on how to configure the system product to meet the applica-tion requirements. You don’t develop design models of the system, such as models of the system objects and their interactions. I discuss this reuse-based approach to development in Chapter 15.
I assume that most readers of this book have had experience of program design 
and implementation. This is something that you acquire as you learn to program and master the elements of a programming language like Java or Python. You will have probably learned about good programming practice in the programming lan-guages that you have studied, as well as how to debug programs that you have developed. Therefore, I don’t cover programming topics here. Instead, this chapter  
has two aims:
1.
 To show how system modeling and architectural design (covered in Chapters 5 
and 6) are put into practice in developing an object-oriented software design.

--- PAGE 198 (book page ~196) ---
198	 	Chapter 	7	■	Design 	and	implementation
2. To introduce important implementation issues that are not usually covered in 
programming books. These include software reuse, configuration management and open-source development.
As there are a vast number of different development platforms, the chapter is not 
biased toward any particular programming language or implementation technology. Therefore, I have presented all examples using the UML rather than a programming language such as Java or Python.
	 7.1		Object-oriented 	design 	using 	the	UML
An object-oriented system is made up of interacting objects that maintain their own local state and provide operations on that state. The representation of the state is private and cannot be accessed directly from outside the object. Object-oriented design processes involve designing object classes and the relationships between these classes. These classes define the objects in the system and their interactions. When the design is realized as an executing program, the objects are created dynamically from these class definitions.
Objects include both data and operations to manipulate that data. They may there-
fore be understood and modified as stand-alone entities. Changing the implementa-tion of an object or adding services should not affect other system objects. Because objects are associated with things, there is often a clear mapping between real-world entities (such as hardware components) and their controlling objects in the system. This improves the understandability, and hence the maintainability, of the design.
To develop a system design from concept to detailed, object-oriented design, you 
need to:
1.
 Understand and define the context and the external interactions with the system.
2. Design the system architecture.
3. Identify the principal objects in the system.
4. Develop design models.
5. Specify interfaces.
Like all creative activities, design is not a clear-cut, sequential process. You 
develop a design by getting ideas, proposing solutions, and refining these solutions 
as information becomes available. You inevitably have to backtrack and retry when problems arise. Sometimes you explore options in detail to see if they work; at other times you ignore details until late in the process. Sometimes you use notations, such as the UML, precisely to clarify aspects of the design; at other times, notations are used informally to stimulate discussions.
I explain object-oriented software design by developing a design for part of the 
embedded software for the wilderness weather station that I introduced in Chapter 1. Wilderness weather stations are deployed in remote areas. Each weather station 

--- PAGE 199 (book page ~197) ---
	 7.1	■	Object-oriented 	design 	using 	the	UML 		199
records local weather information and periodically transfers this to a weather infor-
mation system, using a satellite link.
 7.1.1  System context and interactions
The first stage in any software design process is to develop an understanding of the relationships between the software that is being designed and its external environment. This is essential for deciding how to provide the required system functionality and how to structure the system to communicate with its environment. As I discussed in Chapter 5, understanding the context also lets you establish the boundaries of the system.
Setting the system boundaries helps you decide what features are implemented in 
the system being designed and what features are in other associated systems. In this case, you need to decide how functionality is distributed between the control system for all of the weather stations and the embedded software in the weather station itself.
System context models and interaction models present complementary views of 
the relationships between a system and its environment:
1.
 A system context model is a structural model that demonstrates the other sys-
tems in the environment of the system being developed.
2. An interaction model is a dynamic model that shows how the system interacts with its environment as it is used.
The context model of a system may be represented using associations. 
Associations simply show that there are some relationships between the entities involved in the association. You can document the environment of the system using a simple block diagram, showing the entities in the system and their associations. Figure 7.1 shows that the systems in the environment of each weather station are a weather information system, an onboard satellite system, and a control system. The cardinality information on the link shows that there is a single control system but several weather stations, one satellite, and one general weather information system.
When you model the interactions of a system with its environment, you should 
use an abstract approach that does not include too much detail. One way to do this is to use a use case model. As I discussed in Chapters 4 and 5, each  use case represents Weather
information
system1..n 1 Weather
station
Satellite1
11..n
1Control
system 1 1
11 ..n
Figure 7.1  System 
context for the weather station 

--- PAGE 200 (book page ~198) ---
200	 	Chapter 	7	■	Design 	and	implementation
an interaction with the system. Each possible interaction is named in an ellipse, and 
the external entity involved in the interaction is represented by a stick figure.
The use case model for the weather station is shown in Figure 7.2. This shows 
that the weather station interacts with the weather information system to report weather data and the status of the weather station hardware. Other interactions are with a control system that can issue specific weather station control commands. The stick figure is used in the UML to represent other systems as well as human users.
Each of these use cases should be described in structured natural language. This 
helps designers identify objects in the system and gives them an understanding of what the system is intended to do. I use a standard format for this description that clearly identifies what information is exchanged, how the interaction is initiated, and so on. As I explain in Chapter 21, embedded systems are often modeled by 
 describing 
ShutdownReport
weather
RestartReport status
ReconfigureWeather
information
system
Control
systemPowersave
Remote
controlFigure 7.2  Weather 
station use casesWeather station use cases
Report weather–send weather data to the weather information system
Report status–send status information to the weather information systemRestart–if the weather station is shut down, restart the systemShutdown–shut down the weather stationReconfigure–reconfigure the weather station softwarePowersave–put the weather station into power-saving modeRemote control–send control commands to any weather station subsystem
http://software-engineering-book.com/web/ws-use-cases/

--- PAGE 201 (book page ~199) ---
	 7.1	■	Object-oriented 	design 	using 	the	UML 		201
Figure 7.3  Use case 
description—Report 
weatherhow they respond to internal or external stimuli. Therefore, the stimuli and associ-ated responses should be listed in the description. Figure 7.3 shows the description of the Report weather use case from Figure 7.2 that is based on this approach.
 7.1.2  Architectural design
Once the interactions between the software system and the system’s environment have been defined, you use this information as a basis for designing the system archi-tecture. Of course, you need to combine this knowledge with your general knowl-edge of the principles of architectural design and with more detailed domain knowledge. You identify the major components that make up the system and their interactions. You may then design the system organization using an architectural pattern such as a layered or client–server model.
The high-level architectural design for the weather station software is shown in 
Figure 7.4. The weather station is composed of independent subsystems that 
 communicate 
«subsystem»
Data collection«subsystem»
Communications«subsystem»
Configuration manager«subsystem»
Fault manager«subsystem»
Power manager
«subsystem»
InstrumentsCommunication link
Figure 7.4  High-level 
architecture of weather station System Weather station
Use case Report weather
Actors Weather information system, Weather station
Data The weather station sends a summary of the weather data that has been collected from the instruments in the collection period to the weather information system. The data sent are the maximum, minimum, and average ground and air temperatures; the maximum, minimum, and average air pressures; the maximum, minimum and average wind speeds; the total rainfall; and the wind direction as sampled at 5-minute intervals.
Stimulus The weather information system establishes a satellite communication link with the weather station and requests transmission of the data.
Response The summarized data is sent to the weather information system.
Comments Weather stations are usually asked to report once per hour, but this frequency may differ from one station to another and may be modified in future.

--- PAGE 202 (book page ~200) ---
202	 	Chapter 	7	■	Design 	and	implementation
by broadcasting messages on a common infrastructure, shown as Communication  link in 
Figure 7.4. Each subsystem listens for messages on that infrastructure and picks up the 
messages that are intended for them. This “listener model” is a commonly used architec-tural style for distributed systems.
When the communications subsystem receives a control command, such as shut-
down, the command is picked up by each of the other subsystems, which then shut themselves down in the correct way. The key benefit of this architecture is that it is easy to support different configurations of subsystems because the sender of a mes-sage does not need to address the message to a particular subsystem.
Figure 7.5 shows the architecture of the data collection subsystem, which is included 
in Figure 7.4. The 
Transmitter  and Receiver  objects are concerned with managing 
communications, and the WeatherData  object encapsulates the information that is col-
lected from the instruments and transmitted to the weather information system. This arrangement follows the producer–consumer pattern, discussed in Chapter 21.
 7.1.3  Object class identification
By this stage in the design process, you should have some ideas about the essential objects in the system that you are designing. As your understanding of the design develops, you refine these ideas about the system objects. The use case description helps to identify objects and operations in the system. From the description of the Report weather use case, it is obvious that you will need to implement objects repre-senting the instruments that collect weather data and an object representing the 
 summary of the weather data. You also usually need a high-level system object or objects that encapsulate the system interactions defined in the use cases. With these objects in mind, you can start to identify the general object classes in the system.
As object-oriented design evolved in the 1980s, various ways of identifying 
object classes in object-oriented systems were suggested:
1.
 Use a grammatical analysis of a natural language description of the system to be 
constructed. Objects and attributes are nouns; operations or services are verbs (Abbott 1983).
2.
 Use tangible entities (things) in the application domain such as aircraft, roles such as manager, events such as request, interactions such as meetings, locations Data collection
Transmitter Receiver
WeatherDataFigure 7.5  Architecture 
of data collection  system

--- PAGE 203 (book page ~201) ---
	 7.1	■	Object-oriented 	design 	using 	the	UML 		203
such as offices, organizational units such as companies, and so on (Wirfs-Brock, 
Wilkerson, and Weiner 1990).
3. Use a scenario-based analysis where various scenarios of system use are identi-fied and analyzed in turn. As each scenario is analyzed, the team responsible for the analysis must identify the required objects, attributes, and operations (Beck and Cunningham 1989).
In practice, you have to use several knowledge sources to discover object classes. Object classes, attributes, and operations that are initially identified from the informal system description can be a starting point for the design. Information from application domain knowledge or scenario analysis may then be used to refine and extend the ini -
tial objects. This information can be collected from requirements documents, discus-sions with users, or analyses of existing systems. As well as the objects representing entities external to the system, you may also have to design “implementation objects” that are used to provide general services such as searching and validity checking.
In the wilderness weather station, object identification is based on the tangible 
hardware in the system. I don’t have space to include all the system objects here, but I have shown five object classes in Figure 7.6. The 
Ground thermometer , 
Anemometer , and  Barometer  objects are application domain objects, and the 
WeatherStation  and WeatherData  objects have been identified from the system 
description and the scenario (use case) description:
1. The WeatherStation  object class provides the basic interface of the weather sta-
tion with its environment. Its operations are based on the interactions shown in 
Figure 7.3. I use a single object class, and it includes all of these interactions. Alternatively, you could design the system interface as several different classes, with one class per interaction.identifier
reportWeather ( )
reportStatus ( )
powerSave (instruments)
remoteControl (commands)
reconfigure (commands)
restart (instruments)
shutdown (instruments)WeatherStation
get ( )
test ( )Ground
thermometer
temperatureAnemometer
windSpeedwindDirection
get ( )test ( )Barometer
pressure
height
get ( )
test ( )WeatherData
airTemperaturesgroundTemperatureswindSpeedswindDirectionspressuresrainfall
collect ( )summarize ( )
gt_Identan_Ident bar_Ident
Figure 7.6  Weather 
station objects

--- PAGE 204 (book page ~202) ---
204	 	Chapter 	7	■	Design 	and	implementation
2. The WeatherData  object class is responsible for processing the report weather 
command. It sends the summarized data from the weather station instruments to 
the weather information system.
3. The Ground thermometer , Anemometer , and Barometer  object classes are directly 
related to instruments in the system. They reflect tangible hardware entities in the system and the operations are concerned with controlling that hardware. These objects operate autonomously to collect data at the specified frequency and store the collected data locally. This data is delivered to the 
WeatherData  object on request.
You use knowledge of the application domain to identify other objects, attributes. 
and services:
1. Weather stations are often located in remote places and include various instru-
ments that sometimes go wrong. Instrument failures should be reported auto-matically. This implies that you need attributes and operations to check the correct functioning of the instruments.
2.
 There are many remote weather stations, so each weather station should have its own identifier so that it can be uniquely identified in communications.
3.
 As weather stations are installed at different times, the types of instrument may be different. Therefore, each instrument should also be uniquely identified, and a database of instrument information should be maintained.
At this stage in the design process, you should focus on the objects themselves, with -
out thinking about how these objects might be implemented. Once you have identified the objects, you then refine the object design. You look for common features and then design the inheritance hierarchy for the system. For example, you may identify an 
Instrument  superclass, which defines the common features of all instruments, such as an 
identifier, and get and test operations. You may also add new attributes and operations to the superclass, such as an attribute that records how often data should be collected.
 7.1.4  Design models
Design or system models, as I discussed in Chapter 5, show the objects or object classes in a system. They also show the associations and relationships between these entities. These models are the bridge between the system requirements and the implementation of a system. They have to be abstract so that unnecessary detail doesn’t hide the rela -
tionships between them and the system requirements. However, they also have to include enough detail for programmers to make implementation decisions.
The level of detail that you need in a design model depends on the design process 
used. Where there are close links between requirements engineers, designers and programmers, then abstract models may be all that are required. Specific design decisions may be made as the system is implemented, with problems resolved through informal discussions. Similarly, if agile development is used, outline design models on a whiteboard may be all that is required.
